HUM101 Quiz 3
Nov 8
Religion and Philosophy in India and China
Hellnestic World
Rome: Republic to Empire


The Italian Peninsula

Iron age was culturally very complex

Speakers of Indo-European language (italid): settled between 4000 - 1200 BCE

Italic communities:
	spoke different languages
	politically divided in small cheftancies
	the Celts or Gauls(also Indo-European) settle in the North of Italy and France
	Greeks (also Indo Europeans) settle and colonizes the Italian south and Sicily
	Etruscans (non-Indo-Europeans): lived in Central Italy and built splendid cities in a imitation of Greeks



THE RISE OF Rome

One of the languages of the Italic family was Latin, spoken in West Central Italy.

Rome
	An Iron age settlement build over seven hills
	THe main political center of Latin-Speakers
	According to the Roman legend, founded on 21 April 753 BCE by Romolus, the descendant of an escaped Trojan warrior.
	Small city quickly became prominent over it's neighbors.

[
	City State
	Kingdom
	Republic
	Empire

	The transition between Republic and Empire is very important.
]


The Roman Republic

Res Publica: The Republic
	509 BCE onwards
	The Senate: 300 to 600 patricians (original families)
	Two consuls: elected for a year
	
	Plebeians: "Common people"
		Originally couldn't sit on the Senate
		Gradually obtained the right through military or bureaucratic service
		Ten men from the commoners/tribunes

	Political crises: Dictator - his verdict is dicta (absolute power)
	[Senate chooses the dictator]

System of governance continues for following 5 centuries

	[bunch of people talking around, senex - originates the concept of Senate]	


Taking over Italy

Rome slowly conquered its neighbors
	Italic, Etruscans and Celtic

As Rome grew in importance, the main legal distinction became that between Roman and non-Roman, rather than between plebeian and patrician.

Huge amounts of slaves transformed Roman Society and economy
	Increasing class differences



War Ethos

Sense of honor

Tough regime of training and discipline
	Small infractions punishable by death

Soldiers recruited between 17-18

Legendary military heroes and their commitment to war
	Marcus Sergius: crippled in both hands and feet. Wounded in 23 battles.

Annual Spring campaigns in March

Personal ambition for advancement, political power and wealth.



The Punic Wars

In conquests drew it into wars with the powerful African commercial city state of Carthage

The First Punic War (264 - 241 BCE):
	Carthage lost its hegemony in the Mediterranean and the island of Sicily

The Second Punic War (218 - 201 BCE):
	Cathaginian general Hannibal managed to invade Italy.
	Almost succeeded in destroying Rome
	Carthage was defeated

Third Punic War (146 BCE):
	Carthage was destroyed.
	All men killed, woman and children enslaved.



[Then comes a period when Rome heads to decline. Similar with the situation of Athens and Sparta]


Civil Wars

Internal conflicts arose after the destruction of Carthage due to the increased political importance of generals.

Class conflicts also tied into the competitive aims of politicians and generals
	Patricians and plebeians

Roman generals and politicians started transforming the city's competitive politics into violent, military conflicts.

Twelve civil wars broke out between 89 BCE and 27 BCE



Julius Caesar (100 to 44 BCE)

Roman general, charismatic military and political leader.
Acting almost entirely on private initiative, used his armies to conquer the Celtic tribes of Gaul
Attentive to public image: orator
He went on to win a civil war against rival generals
Murdered by opponents who suspected he wanted to become a king


[
Differnce between King and Emperor:
	King is one person who dictates the law.
	Emperor enjoys the status of Republic and at the same time the laws don't work on him. He enforces the law. And emperor also had Senate
]


Augusts' Empire

Violence ended when Octavian, a nephew of general Ceasar, seizes power
	Octavian, a nephew of general Caesar, seizes power.
	Authoritarian rule.
	Controlled the Senate through a series of reforms and his control of the army
	The Senate's importance collapsed, the Republic died out.
	Emperor Augustus "The Reverend One"
	Passed law to ensure his successor was his stepson Tiberius.

22 emperors by virtue of birth.

Pax Romana: "Roman Peace", 25 BCE - 235 BCE


The Roman Empire

Europe, Western Asia and East Africa joined into one dynamic economy
	Foundation of cities across these regions
	Uniform material culture across the empire

Citizens of many cities across the empire claimed the same rights as Romans
	Importance of city of Rome declines.
	By 212 CE Roman citizenship was granted to all free man across the Empire

Under the pressure from foreign invasions in the 4th to 5th Century CE (476 CE)
	Romano-Germanic barbarian tribes sack Rome repeatedly.



In Fourth Century CE, Roman empire gets divided into two Empires
	Western Roman Empire, falls in 476 CE
	Eastern Roman Empire



The Roman City

The Roman idea of civilization spread across non-urban Western Europe
	citied, urban life
	"Urbanitas", the quality of urban-life, signified refinement and politeness (urbanity)

Local elites and Roman settlers across Europe strove to build cities that emulated the magnificence of Rome

High quality material culture
	Recognizable, planned cities
	The development of brick and concrete houses with tiled roofs, drains
	Aqueducts and lead pipes to conduct water

Cities were self governing (municipia), in he hands of local assemblies of property owners.


