Political transition
	Ecological and environmental chagnes
	Urban centers in crisis
	Transhuman migration

New Tech: The Horse Chariot

Poeple moved because of the climate chagne, he transhuman moved because tehy wre moving for better survival and lifestyle. They went from rural to urban settings. SOme go into the cities and live there. Other decided to attack them and take their resources. the city states thus had to adapt ot new chagnes. The resouirces started depleting and the yeilds are decreassing due to the climate.

Some of these people came from Zagros mountain and some from the Stepps. They had domisticated horses and they brought these to Mesopotamia. The horse chariot was an innovation for the war. They began winning battle because of technological advances. So the ones being attacked had to adabt themselves for survival. The changed the city state and they became more concerned with territory. They slowly come under one ruler and empire to grow these way.


City State
Autonomous urban polities
No clearly defined borders
Leadership unknown
Indistinct, possibly mainly religious political organization
Walled cities center around the temple, but all cities were like that

Territorial State
Centralized kingdoms
Identifiable borders
Charismatic rulers
Bureaucracy and fixed legal goals
Large territories, encompassed, many cities, many people

`
Before the temples were the center, but then palaces turn into important figure. Leadership become a bit shared between the ones in the temples and ones in temples.

Polities wre communities that had particular ways of governing them. Polities is a very generic way of desccribing them.

Periods

Akkad (2350 - 2100 BCE)
Newsummerian (3rd dynasty of Ur) 2100 - 2000 BCE
	Elamite Rivals
	Amorean Rivals/Amorite
Old Babyloeian Empire 1894 - 1591 BCE
Kassite Rule (1500 - 1100 BCE)

The development of Akkadian Society

	Sumerian tech such as writing are adobted by neighbors such as Semetic speaking Akkadians.
	Canals also very important because the climate chagned
	Akkadian curse: “may your canal slit up”
	Akkadian society develops differently
	Role of temple as seat of power marginalized by a secular figure Lugal (the ‘big man’)
	Akkadian cities are rules by lines of Kings


Sargon of Akkad (2334 - 2279 BCE)
	Founded the first empire by subjugating nearby cities, first in Akkad, then in Syria (a lower sea to upper sea)
	Sumerian and Akkadian culture meets and Akkadian language spread.
	Use of Sumerian scripts to encode Akkadian language
	Daughter of Enhedueanne, priestess of Inanna in Ur is possibly the first recorded poet in hisoty, with many autograhped poems (“temple hymn”)
	Empire collapses within 150 years.

3rd Dynasty of Ur 2199 2004 BCE 
	Also known as the Sumerian Reminiscence  or Neo-Sumerian period
	Akkadian language was like now used by all inhabitant of Mestopotamia in those of Sumerian origin
	Sumerian language remains of literary significance
	Sumerian literature and culture were  greatly patronized & adapted
	Exclusive codes of law written
	The state collapses under attack of various rivals
	Elam: a bronze based civilization located in the east of Mesopotamia
	Amorites: from the west Mesopotamia (west = Amurru in Akkadian)

The Elamites
	Ppread if nesi tech and urbanization are adopted by other neighbours
	Most prominent neibours to adopt techs are the elamites in south west iran (susiaiane/khuzastan)
	They are language isolate

Babylon and Hammurabi (1792- 1750 bce)
	The end of the akkedian and sumerian ruling houses were not the end of life 
	Amorites and locals mixed
	Hammurabi, an amorite settled in akkad built a second powerful empire across meso inspired by sargon
	Empire based on a new city babylon .literature flourishes. iimpresive low code written
	Empire short lived soon attacked. Babylon will remain however the main meso city despite sacking by hittites in 1591 bce

	slowly the south rivery areas were sinky and the arable lands were being exhausted so with each succesive empire the power houses moved north

the code of Hammurabi (written in akkadian)
	282 laws in cuneiform on large stone stele
	ruler upholds just order
	social and family laws
	stratified society
	lex talionies law of retaliation (eye for an eye)
	people were unequal in the eyes of the law
	then again there was the law of innocent until proven guilty

The Kassites 1500-1100 BCE
	People from the Zargos mountain
	Dynasty founded by Gandash of Mari 
	Golden age of trade and commerce

Salinization and collapse
	Rivers transport sediments which were mainly salts not just silts
	Slow rivers accumulated saline sediments on their banks  rather than flushing it on the sea. canals slow water flow
	Rivers subjected to evaporation also leave greater salinity
	Euphretes and Tigris amass great masses of saline deposited in lower meso prompting ecological collapse