Dynastic Egypt

Old kingdom to New Kingdom

We have only learned about the leadership of Egypt, deveopment of neolithic, unification.

The periods of Egyptian History
Predynastic Egypt (4000 to 3100)
Early dynastic Egypt (3100 2600)
Old kingdom (2650 2150)
Middle kingdom (2000 1700)
New kingdom (1550 1070)

Nile from South to North

The dynastic history of Egypt

Roman age priest manetho
 - divided the history of Egypt in 31 dynastices, starting with the unification of the coutnry under a king he called Menes
 - The Egyptians had no word or concept of "Dynasty"
 - Per : house. implies a family sharing one protective god and one burial site

 Many dyansties are thus simply sons that used a different burial spot than their fathers.

 Egyptains recorded dysnastic lists (lists of kings and their families) on many inscriptions.

 	- "Palermo stone" is as old as 2339 2283 bce
 	turin and abays




THE FIRST PHARAOH

Manetho claimed the first man to unify Upper and Lower Egypt was caled Menes

1898
 Heraconpolis archeologists discover the Nermer Palette: the first historiacal document in the world
 The palette was found in a very early tomb from 3100 BCE approx.

Palette also signifers that Upper Egypt conquered Lower Egypt.

 Upper Crown Hedjet, Lower Crown Deshret - > double crown pschent


THE NARMER PALETTE

 The hieroglyphic sign, called serekhs of a king.

 King is called n'r (catfish sign) and mr (chisel sign), so Narmer.

 Many serekhs of King Narmer have been found since then, proving he was an important king

 Narmer is depicted as King of Upper Egypt defeating a man identified by the symbol of Lower Egypt.


 Note: We can say Menes unified Egypt, but that's source is Manetho, whereas, Narmer would be king who unified Egypt according to the palette that has been found



EARLY Dynastic Period (3100 2650 BCE)

Narmer's successors built mastabas(tombs) at Abydos.
Local Gods were absorbed into a National Pantheon.
	Each city has a resident God and cult
Local nobles were included into the state by joining the Royal Palace
Egyptian warriors and traders moved far and wide to collect tributes and slaves.
	Egypitain forts in a Palestine collected copper, olive oil, wine, resins, silver, timber.



OLD KINGDOM(2650 2150)

Many historians don't make much of a diff between early dynastic and old kingdom

Djoser(Zoser):
	Founding king of 3rd Dynasty
	Switces captial to Saqqara (Memphis)

Imhotep
	Zoser's chief minister/vizier
	First pyramid builder: the step pyramid
	Sometimes have been called the son of Ptah, a God of architechture.

The Pyramid:
	New Type of funerary complex
	6 mastabas stacked on top of one another.
	A 51 meters high, surrounded by an impressive high enclosure.

	THe purpose of pyramid is burial, but the sturctures were grand. THe old kingdom is considered as Golden Age of Egypt.



THE PYRAMID OF GIZA

Khufu (Cheops)
	Pharaoh the 4th Dynasty, died in 2650 BCE
	Oversaw the creation of the largest pyramid ever
	Structure 140 meters high, built with tonnes of limestone.
	Peasants, seasonal workers and Nubian slaves [ Nubia is at South of Egypt ]

The unpralleld strcture has caused awe ever since.

Equality towering structures were built by  his sons.

Monumental sphnix and two more huge pyramids added to the complex by successors.

All the materials were imported from off-site


You should notice the centralization that was needed for such a project to successed and how much money it had cost and how Egypt could afford all of it. It also shows how important the idea of Death was in this time period.





KINGS AND GODS

The kings of this dynasty and the following ones emphasized their divinity
	Inscriptions of "Perfect God" or "Great God"
	Ascended into Godhood upon death
	A shepherd to his flock: the crook and the flail [Crook and flail showed how he would be shepard of the flock.]
	Uphold natural Order

Priestly Class
	Conducted all ritual activities
	Held massive spiritual authority
	Heirachized and organzied

	[inner circles of the temple were only acciessible to the priests. They became the conduit.]

Contradictory aspects within single deities: animal and divine
[Any time of God had an animal apperance and a divine apperance. Anthropomorphic.]



[During this time, the city with with most prominence, their God also had prominent presense overall usually. Chief God was Ra who was considered the most powerful]






WRITING

Heieroglyphics
	Formal writing system
	Logographic and alphabetic
	Temples and sacred texts
	[temples, priests using this, official documents, anything to do with royality]
	[+ diff between logographics and alphabetic]

Demotic (popular) writing
	For common use

Literacy valued among elites.

Scribes emplyed exclusively for purposes of writing and recordkeeping.

[Scribes are people who's job it is to write and copy and transcribe. There was an entire class of people who were scribes. ]




Middle Kingdom (2000 1700 BCE)

After serveral dynasties, the centralized structure of the Old Kingdom went into crisis
	Severe century long droughts

Power fell to various nobles in different provinces and cities. Pyramids became smaller or stopped being built.

Egypt was later reunified by Theban ruler Mentuhotep II, starting the Middle kingdom. [He originated in Thebes]

The pharaohs of the Middle Kingdom(11th and 12th Dynasties) patronized the building of temples instead of pyramids.

Rise of the cult Auun, the "hidden" God. Merges with sun god Ra to become Amun-ra, the king of Gods.

[Middle kingdom and onwards were more into building temples.]





HYKSOS INVASION (1640 BCE)

The middle Kingdom period also ended in crisis and regional disintegration.

Hyksos: "lord of Foreign Lands"
	Western Semitic speaking people from Southwest Asia
	Overthrew the 13th Dyansty and settled in Lower Egypt
	Brought new technologies to Egypt
	Adobted Egyptian ways
	Enentually remembered as Egypt's 15th Dynasty

	[Hyksos had Horse chariots, whereas the Pharaoh had only foodsoldiers]

Upper Egypt continued under Egyptian rule with kingdoms in parts of Lower Egypt


[16th and 17th dynasties are from the Egyptian rule]






NEW KINGDOM (1550 1070)

Warrior nobles from thebes successded in expelling the Hyksos
	Reunited Egypt under Egyptain rule
	The "new kingdom"

	[Now, Egyptians had access to newer technologies. Created a new weapon, scimitar, which is sword with sharp ends. Using this technology they attacked Hykos and brought Lower Egypt under the Egyptian rule again]

Territorial and expansionist policies
	From Mediterranean to Ethiopia

International diplomacy
	[Egyptain rulers started to communicate with other Kingdoms, rulerss]

Technological development





HATSHEPSUT: THE FIRST EGYPTIAN QUEEN

Queen ofthe 18th dynasty

Often called the first great woman of whom we are informed: woman had ruled previously through

Rules as regent for son Thutmosis III

Left an impressive monumental legacy by building hundredsof sturctures.


[+ mention which period, ]






AKHENATEN: The first Monotheist

Formerly Amenhotep IV promoted worship of a sole god, Aten [from sundisk.]

Under his orders inscriptions dedicated to he the main protector god of his dynasty, Amun-Ra were erased, and the temples were damaged
	Patronage removed from temples
	New capital built for the new kingdom: Amarna

Radically different art styles developed under his reign.
	The "Amarna" style

He also developed literarature
	Supposed authored a long hieroglyphic hymn to God.

[But this shift to monotheist didn't last long. His song again settled back to Amun Ra]





Nefratiti, Akhentaten's Queen was Nefratiti




Ramesses II (1279 1213 BCE)

New kingdom Egypt reached the peak of its power under a general who became the pharaoh Ramessess II

The Hitties: A powerful people from Anatolia speaking an Indo European language

They had challenged the supremacy of Egypt over the neighboring regions of Palestine

Ramesses defeated them in the battle of Qadesh.
	The largest and most famous battle of the Bronze age
	Many thousand of chariots used

No clear winner.





