page 106

Shang Dynasty 1600 1050

The first important political center in china, emerges on the upper yelllow river

no clearly established borders
	No rival territorial states

Archelogical discovery of its captials proved its historicity

build on an existing cultural complex (longshan culture)
	bronze casting 
	earliest chinese writing

	[developemnt of a heridatory rule i.e position of being a ruler becomes heridatory]

[Tang first king. Mythical stories about Tang wrote in bamboo splits (annals) to establish his legitimacy. Offered himself to sacrifice for droughts to end. Survives and was a moral just king]


POWER AND LEGITIMACY

[shang comes into power by conquering three impprortant aspects of chinese culture. took over mining/ so now they had access to raw materials for weapons and tools. thry also had a solid grip on agriculture. devepoped new tools for agirculture. things that helped irrigation. they established lunar calendar]


Metal working
	Control of mines and metal sources.

	[They used copper, tin and other metals to do Bronze casting and make weapons. By limiting access to copper, tin Shang Kings could deprieve their opponents of Bronze. So, the opponents had to use regular weapons made of wood, and stone spears. Therefore the Shang Soldiers could easily win against them and rivals didn't really pose much of a threat.

Agritculture
	The 350 Lunar calendar, with leap months.
	new tools: spades, sickles

	[The Shangs understand the importance of agriculture for winning and maintaining power. So they did eveything to promote its deveopemnt. In fact the activities of local governors and masses revolved around agirculture. They cleared forests to make way for cultivation. The royals had their own farms. Farmers raised dogs, pigs, sheeps and oxen. They also invented tools like speades, sickles to help cultivation. To keep track of all these activities, Shangs developed a 12 month, 360 day lunar calendar with leap months.

Tributes from Elites and allies

	[Ellites supplied warriors and laborers, while allies send foodsstuff and works. Commoners sent their tirbute to the elites.

Ruler embodied both religious and politicala power
	Patrimonial theocrqcy
	[ patrimonial - based on the father figure. so all the shang rulers were considered Gods or very close to being God]
	rulers defied after death
	[ ruler were the head of cleargy. ruler is the main head of the state. he gets the final say.]


[They had death ritual, which involved sacrificing humans to accompany the decesed i nthe next life. A memember of royal family was often buried with his full entourage.


They made extensive usage of writng to establish that the power and legitmacy of the King.


THE ORACLE BONES

Shang beliefs revolved around ancestor worshipping


COmmunication with ancestors expressed in practiees of divination (soothsaying)
	cracks in animal bones induced by a soothsayer by applying intense heat
	interpreted by the diviner
	were believed to reveal the future
	turtle shells, ox scapula
	crucial for political power

As part of these rituals ,the Shang dynasty saw the development the earliest Chinese characters, found oracle bones(dragon bones)


ZHOU DYNASTY 1045 770

A Periphierical, North Western people. 

[Were allies before and had sworn alligience.]

attacked and ended shang power during a time of environmental crisis and degradation

Defeated the Shang in 1045 BCE
	claimed an imperial title over vast lands, which it declared its own kingdom ( zhongguo: the middle kingdom)

greater integration than during shang period

limits of power meant had to continue relying on the local power holers


Mandate of heavens

Tianming: 

Ideology to support a morally correct takeover of the Shang by Zhou

	heavenly powers legitimatized trigtes ot turle: contract between the Zhou and the sky god

	ruler must uphold heaven's principle of harmony and honor
	instability to land a threat to the ruler's mandate
	dethronement interpreted as the loss of mandate
	ensured continuity of political structure

became a political doctrine rather than religious.
	used to rationalize overthrow or fall of ruling regimes
	provided an enduring ideology of the legitimacy and power in Chinese history


A cultural revolution

Zhou court sponsored a number of other, far reaching changes:
	System of divination organized systematically during the Zhou period.
		The I-ching (Book of changes)
	Earliest Chinese literature can a traced to the Zhou period
		Book of Odes
	Formal legal code organized by King Mu



IRON AGE IN CHINA

The zhou period also saw the adoptation or iron working
	bronze retained its ritual significance

Iron tools helped the expansion of agriculture signified by huge works of canal building undertaken by the Zhou capital of Xiangang (xiian) on the Yellow and Wei River

The creation of more effective weapons

Iron adaption was not exclusive preserve of the emperor. Feudal lords and barbarian tribes also adobted iron.


Collpase: 771 BC
Northen Steppe invaded sacked capital in Xian (Barbarians, Nomads)
The Zhous were forced to flee the East.
This marks the beginning of the Warring States Period.

