We don't really know if Indus is a valid script. We found steatite seals with markings what we call indus script. This markings may be interpreated as indus scirpts. more recently however as we failed to understand anything the markings as script, it might not be a script at all. some people guess this markings signify ownership or something that helped with trading. 

many of markings do not repeat itself. had it been a script, there would have been many repatatons in the pattern of the script. however that has not really been the case.

so the current belief is, there was no indus script. previously we thought they wrote, but now we don't think that anymore.



Greco-Persian Wars

Of a time when Greece is thriving. In fact the end of the war, begins the mark of the golden age of greece, the flourshing of Greece. 

Perisans wanted to protect their imperial interest. Persians were expanding. So the persia wanted to conquer Authens. First during ... then Xarsis. First one is failed, second time athens forms alliance with other cities.

The Greco Persian wars brought all the cities of Greece together. Even though each polis were indenpendent and different from each other, but when Persians attacked, they fought them off together. First war that firs east againsts west.

Nomads and Chariots:
The beginning of Velic and Avestan culture (1500-500 BCE).

Periods and Places 

Afghanistan, northwest India, Gangetic Plains
Vedic Period (1500-500 BCE)
Iron age (1200 BCE)
Afghanistan, Iranice Plateau
Avestan Period (1500-700 BCE)
Iron Age (1400 BCE)


The Indo-European Language Family

The world’s largest language family by no. Of speakers
Coalesced at an unclear date in central Asia or the Caucasus 
Divided into several branches as speakers moved west or south east
Moving west: Hellenic, Italic, Celtic, Germanic, Baltic, Slavic people ended up inhabiting most of Europe
Moving south east: related indo-Aryan and iranic speakers moved into Afghanistan Iran and the Indian subcontinent 
We know about ancient indo-Aryan and iranic society thanks to their oral poems - The Vedas and Avesta

Vedic Period (1500-650 BCE)

Takes its name from the Vedas
Oral religious texts
Passed on orally for generations
Onlyput into writing in the 11th and 12th century BCE
Rig-Veda, samr-Veda, Tajur-Veda, Atharva-Veda
Early Vedic Society
Also known as rigvedic society from the oldest vedas text
Organized mainly across tribal lines
Two social types
Majanya: Refers to a member clan’s warrior lineage the ruler called the rajan
Vis : refers to pastoral-farming free man

The evolution of vedic society
As vedic pastoral tribal society occupied greater parts of south asia’s ganjetic valley, transformations began to occur
Move from nomadic pastoral society to settled agriculture
Social stratification as warrior families claim greater social power over the surplus : kshatriya 
Sacred power held by religion specialists : Brahmans
Legitimizes the power of the new warrior class through ritual orifice (They had ritual importance)
Only group allowed to know and recite the vedas or conduct sacrifices
Emergence of a subject non-free peasant class sudra

The Vedic Sacrifice 
Hierarchies in the vedic period are expressed through rituals of sacrifices dedicated to the main vedic gods (yajna)
Individuals from important families that aspire to social and political power must please the gods by committing large resources to brahmins
Only brahmins can ensure the achievement and maintenance of power and preservation of order (varn = race , sharma = work, dharma = religion)  through vedic sacrifice


The Cast-Order (varnasharmadharma)
By the end of vedic period, new ideologies of social organization had become commonly accepted
Brahmins popularized a sacred hierarchy based on principles of purity and pollution and connected to the ability to commission vedic sacrifice
Argued that society was structured into four varnas
Brahmins
Kshatriyas
Vaisyas
Sudras
This ideology will remain central to much hindu religious thought

Second urbanization (first was the indus valley)
The rise of powerful chiefs among vedic tribes evolved slowly into the emergence of powerful kingdoms (mahajanopades)
The most famous one is that of Kuru-Pancala
Earliest vadic state
Straddling punjab and western uttar pradesh
The settling of the mahabharata- a great epic about a struggle for power between the kuru family
Cities and artisanal production emerges again
Kshatriyas less interested in spending surplus on brahmins

Persian and the Iranic languages
Persian (farsi) today refers to a language of iranic language family
Iranic languages are part of the wider indo-iranic family which is a part of indo-european family
The oldest iranic language known to us is Avestan
Today iranic languages are kurdish farsi tajik poshtu and balochi

Avastan culture
Old avastan : Spoken in central asia in the second half of the 2nd millenium BCE (1500-1000 BCE)
Younng avastan : spoken in central asia in the first half of the 1sst millenium (1000-500 BCE)
From young avastan the old persian language develops put down in writing using euneiform system around 520 BCE

The avestan tradition

In the old avestan language
5 hymns to gods (Yasht)
General rules on religion
This tradition was orally maintained until 11th century ce when it was written down

# deva - vedic-god
Dueva - avestan - demon 



