Zarathustra and Zoroastrianism

Zarathustra (Zoroaster)
	Mentioned in all five of the Gathas in the old Avesta
	he is the first man to be created and to sacrifce to the Gods in a correct manner
	In the Younger Avesta he is omnipresent (In the young Avesta)
	Fighting evil and establishing order on earth for Ahura Mazda

Persians called the relgion Mazdayasna - the correct sacrifice to Ahura Mazda, but the Greeks called Zoroastrianism from its "prophetic" figure.

Aim of men is to aid Ahura Mazda in the predistined war to defeat evil led by Ahirman - "The Great Lie"

[Dualistic. Angra Mainyu / Ahirman is personification of everything that is Evil. Locked in to war with Ahura Mazda for as long as the world would last. And at the end Ahura Mazda would win

Zarathustra  is considered to be the Prophet.

The religion is reveled.]


Concepts in Zoroastrianism

Asha : truth and/or righteous moral order. It often means existance. Cannot be translated directly to English.
Pantheon of many lesser god subordinate to Ahura Mazda

Ahirman is inferior to AHura Mazda

The Young Avesta also sets up a legendary history of Iran, developing the old figures of Gods and heroes of the young Avesta.

These figures will later be re-elaborated into the initial part of Shanameh, written in the 11th Century of Ferdowsi.

[The Young Avesta is important in the sense that part of it also says about what was going on then. So, it can be intertrapted as literal history.]


The Rise of Media nad Persia

At an undisclosed point of time during the Young Avestan period, Iranic tribes migrated southwards from Central Asia into the Iranic plateau.

The most importnt of these Iranic tribe were the Medes, who occupied the central Zagros mountains (called Media).

The Persians, another Iranic tribe, occupied a part of the wouth Western platuau, which used tobe called Parsua, "land ofthe Persians"
	Present day region called Fars.


[Zoroastrians lived in India. In Mubbai particularly. There are fire temples. Agiary/Dar-E-Mehr is called the fire temple?]

[Read stuff from the book about Zoroastians]







NEW CHAPTER: Iron Age Power 1
Might and Right in Assyria and Achemenid Persia


People and Places

The Neo-Assyrian Empire (950 - 612 BCE)
	Rivals subdued: Phoenicians and Israelites
	Rebels successful: NeoBabylonians and Medes

The Persian Achamenid Empire 535 - 33d BCE.



Assyria

Located on the Northen fringes of Mesopotamia

Here a city("Ashur", assur) build by a semitic people, the Assyrians, very closely related to the Akkadians, existed by 2500 BCE.

The city itself founded other cities, such as Niniveh. Later the name passed on the whole region: Assyria.

The Assyrians tried their luck at empire building, at times becoming a significant power
	Old Assyrian Empire (2000 1800 BCE)
	Middle Assyrain Empire (1400 1100 BCE)


[If told be write about Assyria, we have to write originis, what it was like. And it translated into the New Aggresive Empire]


Neo-Assyrian Empire(950-612 BCE)

Between 950 and 820 BCE, the kings of Assur build an impressive iron-weapon wielding military force
	Highly militarized society, with large well trained armies
	Monaarchial ideology says the god of Ashur has chosen the king to weild power
	Victories of the king record on stone by court scribes
	Subjugated population terrorized, polices of forced deportations.
		"Land under the yoke of Asur" owed massive tributes to the king.
	Yearly campaigns to keep the army effective.
	Tighlat-Pilser III even took away from the nobility the right to inherit land, further drove centralization.


Phoenicians and Israelites

In the far West, the Assyrians established their power over two dynamic cultures

Phonecians(also known as Chanali/Canaanites)
	A seitic people on the Syrian coast(Present day Lebanon)
	Great ship builders, sea-farers, explorers nad traders.
	Treaty with the Assyrian kings: retained some autonomy in exchange for providing luxury goods
	Famously developed the alphabetic system, the ancestor of btoh later Middle Eastern and Western sciprts. Also developed Glass.


Israelites
	Another Semitic speaking people
	Among the eaerliest, most determined political proponents of monothesism
	A string of powerful, charasmatic prophets - Isiah (720 BCE), Ezra (600 BCE), Jeremiah(590 CE) - forced local kings to strictly uphold the idea of Monotheism
	Region sacked and people enslaved repeatedly by Assryains
	Those who will identify in the religious tadition of this small kindom will be later known as Jews.

	[Hibru is a semitic language. ]


THE LIBRARY OF ASHURBANIPAL
	
It was not only terror though: Assurbanipal(669-627) 
	the last strong king oversaw the las flowering of akkedian culture in Mesopotamia

Archeologist Henry Layard and Hormozd Rassam discovered the king opulent Library	
	30934 clay tablet
	Epic of Gilgamesh literature
	Annals of Ashurbanipal
	Medicine astrology mathematics
	Administrative and political texts



FALL OF ASUR AND THE MEDES

Assyrian eventually faced revolt:
	Nabopolassar, the rebel king of babylon, which frees itself from Assyria, giving way to the Neo-Babylonian period
	Cyaxares, king of a growingly powerful Aranic tribe the Medes, who lived in the Zargos mountain and followed the Avestan religion

In 612 BCE the Assyrian capital Niniveh was destroyed

The medes went to built a powerful kingdom, uniting other Iranic tribes, over the ruins of Assyria


THE HANGING GARDENS OF BABYLON

For a brief period, Babylon returned the centre of an independent state following the collapse of Assyria.

It is tradionally believed taht King Nabuchadnezzar II (605-562 BCE) showcased the city's wealth by building fantastic gardens.

Archeologists have not found the gardens.


CYRUS THE GREAT

A young prince of the Persians

Revolted and challenged the Astages, King of the Medes in c. 535BCE. He won.

Build an impressive capital for himself at Pasargadae.

Spread the Persian Empire into Mesopotamia by tkaing over the city of Babylon

Cyrus promised his subject resepet for their traditions and diverse beliefs: The Cyrus scroll is widely considered as the human rights declaration.


ACHAEMENID PERSIA

Canbyses, Cyrus's son, conquered Egypt

Darius
	took power after Cambyses
	Pushed the borders of the empire into Greece and as east as india
	built a new capital: Persepolis
	Empire centralized and multiculture

Social and political power concentrated in the hands of Persian and Median noble families
But local powerholders often confirmed in their authority
	System of satrapies(provinces), strap(governor)
	Postal services, centrally managed road
	Low tax rates imposed on peasants